---
title:  "Argos"
categories: projects
---

Argos is a content marketing analytics platform, concieved by The Daily Beast, and designed, developed, and maintained by the Planetary team.

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-1.png" caption="The campaign overview page" %}

The advantage of Argos over other content metric platforms is the proprietary **content score**. Creating the scoring algroithm was challenging, but presenting it in a simple manner proved to be the best way to communicate its statistical underpinnings.

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-2.png" caption="The content score module" %}

Designing Argos occured in a number of phases over the course of 2015.

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-3.png" caption="The first design mockup of Argos." %}

Initial layout concepts centered around a simple 1-column layout that could hold a number of components in a rigid hierarchy, maintaining a consistent time-scale on the horizontal axis. This would later become a core design concept for [Spacetime](/projects/spacetime).

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-4.png" caption="An iteration on the initial design concept." %}

Later, the complexity of the components necessitated a more traditional dashboard layout, spanning multiple columns and allowing for more flexible hierarchy.

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-5.png" caption="A more dashboard-centric concept. This approach was the one implemented in the first production release of Argos." %}

After 6 months of use, we had an opportunity to improve the design. We interviewed users and studied analytics data, and came to a few conclusions:

1. The process of setting up a campaign was confusing and led to errors
2. Users found the raw numbers valuable, but wanted more context and insight. The question came up over and over again: "What does this mean?"

Seperately, I saw an opportunity to address a usability concern I had:

- Users with visual impairmnet would have trouble with the color-coded interface.

To tackle these three challenges, I led a refinement of the visual language.

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-6.png" caption="Reducing the importance of color in the interface, and highlighting insights and context." %}

This redesign relied on one major guiding principal: **When using color to encode meaning, always include a distinct secondary visual cue like an icon.**

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-7.png" caption="Relying less on color had another advantage in that it made mobile views easier to parse." %}

{% include image.html src="/images/argos-8.png" caption="The final icon system for Argos." %}
